# Tablescript.rb

This is a Ruby Gem that helps RPG-playing nerds like me generate random things from tables.

For example, a Dungeons & Dragons wandering monster table like this:

    Wandering Monsters (d10):
    
    1-5: d6 orcs
    6-9: 3d6 ancient red dragons
    10: a cuddly bunny

can be automated in Ruby-ish ways like this:

    table :wandering_monsters do
      f( 1..5 ) { "#{roll_dice('d6')} orcs" }
      f( 6..9 ) { "#{roll_dice('3d6')} ancient red dragons" }
      f { "a cuddly bunny" }
    end
    
    puts roll_on( :wandering_monsters )

# Syntax

Tablescript.rb is a simple DSL built on Ruby that helps to define and roll on tables.

Define a table as follows:

    table :table_name do
      ...
    end

Roll on a table as follows:

    roll_on( :table_name )

Table entries define blocks that are returned if the die roll matches the entry. Entries can be simple text:

    f { "a cuddly bunny" }

complex/interpolated text:

    f { "#{roll_dice('3d6')} cuddly bunnies" }

or arbitrary Ruby code:

    f { { :effect => roll_on( :random_limb_loss ), :damage => roll_dice( '4d10' ) }

Table entries are either "f" or "d" for "fixed" and "dynamic" respectively.

Fixed entries are defined for specify die rolls. For example:

    f( 1 ) { ... }

defines the result for the roll of 1.

    f( 5..9 ) { ... }

defines the result for a roll of 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.

    f { ... }

defines the result for the _next_ roll. If it's the first entry, it defaults to 1. Otherwise, it's whatever the previous entry was + 1.

The :wandering_monsters example table above defines 3 entries: 1-5, 6-9, and 10.

Dynamic entries are defined for groups of rolls. For example:

    d( 10 ) { ... }
    d( 50 ) { ... }
    d( 40 ) { ... }

defines 3 groups of results. The first is for rolls of 1-10 (i.e. the first 10). The second is for rolls of 11-60 (i.e. the next 50). And the third is for rolls of 51-100 (i.e. the next 40). In this case the total number of entries works out to 100, so the entries are effectively 10%, 50%, and 40%.

Entries do not have to total 100. For example:

    d( 1 ) { ... }
    d( 2 ) { ... }

defines 2 groups of results where the second has twice the chance of the first. Tablescript will effectively roll a d3.

# Reference

Tablescript includes the following global functions:

## table( name, &blk )

Defines a table, as in the above examples.

## roll_on( name )

Generates a random number from 1 to the highest defined entry, and returns the corresponding table entry from table named _name_.

## roll_on_and_ignore_duplicates( name, times, *args )

Rolls on the _name_ table _times_ times and ignores duplicate rolls.

## lookup( name, roll )

Returns the entry from table _name_ corresponding to the roll _roll_ as if that number had been randomly generated.

## roll_dice( dice )

Returns a random number generated by the dice described by _dice_.

The following formats are acceptable:

    dX: rolls a single X-sided die
    YdX: rolls Y X-sided dice and returns the sum of all rolls
    YdXdl[Z]: rolls Y X-sided dice, drops the lowest Z rolls, and returns the sum of the remainder
    YdXdh[Z]: rolls Y X-sided dice, drops the highest Z rolls, and returns the sum of the remainder

## choose( options )

Returns a random selection from the passed array of options. For example:

    puts choose( [ "red", "green", "blue" ] )

is equivalent to:

    table :temporary do
      f { "red" }
      f { "green" }
      f { "blue" }
    end
    
    puts roll_on( :temporary )
